---
title: "The history of Abies pinsapo during the Holocene in southern Spain, based on pedoanthracological analysis"
authors: "Rubén Pardo‑Martínez José Gómez‑Zotano, and José Antonio Olmedo‑Cobo" 
header:
  teaser: assets/img/papers/2022_abies_pedoanthraco.jpg
journal: Vegetation History and Archaeobotany
year: 2022
volume: 31
pages: 307–321
doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00334-021-00855-w
---

The aim of this research is to reconstruct the ancient distribution area of Abies pinsapo Boiss. (Spanish fir) in the Serranía de Ronda region, southern Spain, during the Holocene. The main method was pedoanthracological analysis, the study of non-archaeological charcoal found in natural soils. In this research a total of 37 soil excavations were done in several mountain ranges with potentially favourable places for firs to have grown in the past. Specific sites and places such as hillsides, endorheic basins (with no outflow), sinkholes, summits and mountain passes were selected on the basis of evidence from a range of different sources including ancient documents, pollen studies and species distribution models. The soil samples collected from these sites were prepared in the laboratory and the charcoal was identified and radiocarbon dated. Statistical and cartographic analyses were also done. 

The study revealed evidence of past populations of Abies sp. in places where it is no longer found today. A total of 47 different chronologies were obtained from these sites with ages ranging between 9,931 cal bp and 78 cal bp. In addition, the wide variations in the charcoal values enabled us to make an initial estimate of the importance of ancient forest fires in different places in the Serranía de Ronda. When this information has been considered with all the other available data sources, it will be an essential resource for the efficient management of relict fir woods in southern Spain.